docs(adr): update ADR-40 by adding low level access to SC (#9451)
cosmos/cosmos-sdk: docs/architecture/adr-040-storage-and-smt-state-commitments.md

IAVL has effectively become an orphaned project within the Cosmos ecosystem and it's proven to be an inefficient state commitment data structure.
In the current design, IAVL is used for both data storage and as a Merkle Tree for state commitments. IAVL is meant to be a standalone Merkelized key/value database, however it's using a KV DB engine to store all tree nodes. So, each node is stored in a separate record in the KV DB. This causes many inefficiencies and problems:

- Each object query requires a tree traversal from the root. Subsequent queries for the same object are cached on the Cosmos SDK level.
- Each edge traversal requires a DB query.
- Creating snapshots is [expensive](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/issues/7215#issuecomment-684804950). It takes about 30 seconds to export less than 100 MB of state (as of March 2020).
- Updates in IAVL may trigger tree reorganization and possible O(log(n)) hashes re-computation, which can become a CPU bottleneck.

> - The node structure is pretty expensive - it contains a standard tree node elements (key, value, left and right element) and additional metadata such as height, version (which is not required by the Cosmos SDK). The entire node is hashed, and that hash is used as the key in the underlying database, [ref](https://github.com/cosmos/iavl/blob/master/docs/node/node.md).

Author: linter

- creating a snapshot
- historical versioning
- pruning (garbage collection)

State Commitment requirements:

- fast updates
- tree path should be short
- query historical commitment proofs using ICS-23 standard
- pruning (garbage collection)

### SMT for State Commitment

A Sparse Merkle tree is based on the idea of a complete Merkle tree of an intractable size. The assumption here is that as the size of the tree is intractable, there would only be a few leaf nodes with valid data blocks relative to the tree size, rendering a sparse tree.

The full specification can be found at [Celestia](https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-specs/blob/ec98170398dfc6394423ee79b00b71038879e211/src/specs/data_structures.md#sparse-merkle-tree). In summary:

- The SMT consists of a binary Merkle tree, constructed in the same fashion as described in [Certificate Transparency (RFC-6962)](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6962), but using as the hashing function SHA-2-256 as defined in [FIPS 180-4](https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.FIPS.180-4).
- Leaves and internal nodes are hashed differently: the one-byte `0x00` is prepended for leaf nodes while `0x01` is prepended for internal nodes.

> - Default values are given to leaf nodes with empty leaves.

Reviewer: Is it worth mentioning what those default values are (`[]byte{}`)?

Author: Yes, will add it.

> - While the above rule is sufficient to pre-compute the values of intermediate nodes that are roots of empty subtrees, a further simplification is to extend this default value to all nodes that are roots of empty subtrees. The 32-byte zero is used as the default value. This rule takes precedence over the above one.

Author: updated

One of the Stargate core features is a _snapshot sync_ delivered in the `/snapshot` package. It provides a way to trustlessly sync a blockchain without repeating all transactions from the genesis. This feature is implemented in Cosmos SDK and requires storage support. Currently IAVL is the only supported backend. It works by streaming to a client a snapshot of a `SS` at a certain version together with a header chain.

> A new database snapshot will be created in every `EndBlocker` and identified by a block height. The `root` store keeps track of the available snapshots to offer `SS` at a certain version. The `root` store implements the `MultiStore` interface described below. In essence, `MultiStore` extends the `Committer` interface. `Committer` has a `Commit`, `SetPruning`, `GetPruning` functions which will be used for creating and removing snapshots. The `rootStore.Commit` function creates a new snapshot and increments the version on each call, and checks if it needs to remove old versions. We will need to update the SMT interface to implement the `Committer` interface.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A new database snapshot will be created in every `EndBlocker` and identified by a block height. The `root` store keeps track of the available snapshots to offer `SS` at a certain version. The `root` store implements the `MultiStore` interface described below. In essence, `MultiStore` extends the `Committer` interface. `Committer` has `Commit`, `SetPruning`, and `GetPruning` functions which will be used for creating and removing snapshots. The `rootStore.Commit` function creates a new snapshot and increments the version on each call, and checks if it needs to remove old versions. We will need to update the SMT interface to implement the `Committer` interface.
```

#### Accessing old state versions

> One of the functional requirements is to access old state. This is done through `abci.RequestQuery` structure. The version is specified by a block height (so we query for an object by a key `K` at block height `H`). The number of old versions supported for `abci.RequestQuery` is configurable. Accessing an old state is done by using available snapshots.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of the functional requirements is to access old state. This is done through an `abci.RequestQuery` structure. The version is specified by a block height (so we query for an object by a key `K` at block height `H`). The number of old versions supported for `abci.RequestQuery` is configurable. Accessing an old state is done by using available snapshots.
```

We identified use-cases, where modules will need to save an object commitment without storing an object itself. Sometimes clients are receiving complex objects, and they have no way to prove a correctness of that object without knowing the storage layout. For those use cases it would be easier to commit to the object without storing it directly.

> ### Low Level Interface

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Low-Level Interface
```

> Modules should be able to commit to a value fully managed by a the module itself. For example: a module can managed it's own special database and commit it's state by setting a value only to `SC`. Currently the store is exposed only through `sdk.Context` through `MultiStore`. We are deprecating the `MultiStore` concept, however the root store interface will be the same. We should extend the root store interface with the following function:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Modules should be able to commit a value fully managed by the module itself. For example, a module can manage its own special database and commit its state by setting a value only to `SC`. Currently the store is exposed only through `sdk.Context` through `MultiStore`. We are deprecating the "multistore" concept, however the root store interface will be the same. We should extend the root store interface with the following function:
```

```
    GetSCStore(key []byte) BasicKVStore
```

And the interface for `BasicKVStore` is:

```
type BasicKVStore interface {
	Get(key []byte) []byte
	Has(key []byte) bool
	Set(key, value []byte)
}
```

> For `SC` store, the `BasicKVStore` gives an access to the `SC` implementation without exposing it's specific behavior. That means that `sc.Get(key)` will pass the query to the SC store which will search for `hash(key)`. To keep the interface as minimal as possible, we don't provide a `Delete` method. If needed, it can be added in the future as a non breaking update.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For `SC` store, the `BasicKVStore` provides access to the `SC` implementation without exposing its specific behavior. That means that `sc.Get(key)` will pass the query to the SC store which will search for `hash(key)`. To keep the interface as minimal as possible, we don't provide a `Delete` method. If needed, it can be added in the future as a non-breaking change.
```

### Low-Level Interface

Modules should be able to commit a value fully managed by the module itself. For example, a module can manage its own special database and commit its state by setting a value only to `SC`. Currently the store is exposed only through `sdk.Context` through `MultiStore`. We are deprecating the "multistore" concept, however the root store interface will be the same. We should extend the root store interface with the following function:

```
    GetSCStore(key []byte) BasicKVStore
```

And the interface for `BasicKVStore` is:

```
type BasicKVStore interface {
	Get(key []byte) []byte
	Has(key []byte) bool
	Set(key, value []byte)
}
```

For `SC` store, the `BasicKVStore` provides access to the `SC` implementation without exposing its specific behavior. That means that `sc.Get(key)` will pass the query to the SC store which will search for `hash(key)`. To keep the interface as minimal as possible, we don't provide a `Delete` method. If needed, it can be added in the future as a non-breaking change.

> TODO: describe race condition.

Reviewer 3: The race condition is still an open question - are we comfortable allowing a user to modify the SC where there's a corresponding SS record? It's hard to predict what breakage that could cause.

Author: I think the solution should be to prohibit creating a new `SS` record if there is a corresponding `SC` record.

Reviewer 3: And vice-versa, the SC can't be updated independently of SS if a record exists for both.

We identified use-cases, where modules will need to save an object commitment without storing an object itself. Sometimes clients are receiving complex objects, and they have no way to prove a correctness of that object without knowing the storage layout. For those use cases it would be easier to commit to the object without storing it directly.

### Low Level Interface

Modules should be able to commit a value fully managed by the module itself. For example, a module can manage its own special database and commit its state by setting a value only to `SC`.
Similarly, a module can save a value without committing it - this is useful for ORM module or secondary indexes (eg x/staking `UnbondingDelegationKey` and `UnbondingDelegationByValIndexKey`).

Currently, a module can access a store only through `sdk.Context`. We add the following methods to the `sdk.Context`:

```
type StoreAccess inteface {
    KVStore(key []byte) KVStore  // reads and writes to combined store (SS & SC)

>     InternalSCStore(key []byte) KVStore  // reads and writes only to the SC

Author: I'm really thinking about removing a direct access to `SC`. We can always add it later on if we will find a real need. For the moment only use case we are aware about is to commit a private store of a module. So small amount of hashes. This can be done by saving directly to the general store.

    InternalSSStore(key []byte) KVStore  // reads and writes only to the SS

> }

Author: During ADR-040 call, we were thinking about separating SS and  InternalSS into separate namespaces. This way we avoid race conditions and conflicts we discuss below.

If we separate in different namespaces then we should rename _Internal SS_ to something else, eg: `PlainSSKVStore` or `StateKVStore`.

Author: When thinking more about it, I think it will make more sense than the low level interface we have been discussing.

Reviewer 4: I think it's fine to present both option 1 & 2 for exposing SS/SC, but as I've said before it simply shouldn't be on `sdk.Context` but rather `MultiStore` and the parameter type should be `StoreKey` not `[]byte`. I can approve if this change is made but I still consider this very much `PROPOSED` status.

    GetKVStore(StoreKey) KVStore
}

// Used as the main app state, replacing CommitMultiStore.
type CommitMultiStore interface {
    BasicMultiStore
    Committer
    Snapshotter

    GetVersion(uint64) (BasicMultiStore, error)
	CacheMultiStore() CacheMultiStore
    SetInitialVersion(uint64) error
}

// Replaces CacheMultiStore for branched state.
type CacheMultiStore interface {
    BasicMultiStore
    Write()
	CacheMultiStore() CacheMultiStore
}

// Example of constructor parameters for the concrete type.
type MultiStoreConfig struct {
    Upgrades        *StoreUpgrades
    InitialVersion  uint64

    ReservePrefix(StoreKey, StoreType)
}
```

NOTE: modules will be able to use a special commitment and their own DBs. For example: a module which will use ZK proofs for state can store and commit this proof in the `MultiStore` (usually as a single record) and manage the specialized store privately or using the `SC` low level interface.

#### Compatibility support

Cosmos SDK users should be only concerned about the module interface, which currently relies on the `KVStore`. We don't change this interface, so the proposed store/v2 is 100% compatible with existing modules.

> The new `MultiStore` and supporting types are implemented in `store/v2` package to provide Cosmos SDK users chocie to use the new store or the old IAVL based on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The new `MultiStore` and supporting types are implemented in `store/v2` package to provide Cosmos SDK users the choice to use the new store or the old IAVL based on.
```

### Positive

- Decoupling state from state commitment introduce better engineering opportunities for further optimizations and better storage patterns.
- Performance improvements.

> - Joining SMT based camp which has wider and proven adoption than IAVL. Example projects which decided on SMT: Ethereum2, Diem (Libra), Trillan, Tezos, Celestia.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Joining SMT based camp which has wider and more proven adoption than IAVL. Example projects which decided on SMT: Ethereum2, Diem (Libra), Trillan, Tezos, Celestia.
```

### Off Chain Store

> We were discussing use case where modules can use a support database, which is not automatically committed. Module will responsible for having a sound storage model and can optionally use the feature discussed in \__Committing to an object without saving it_ section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We were discussing use case where modules can use a support database, which is not automatically committed. Module will be responsible for having a sound storage model and can optionally use the feature discussed in \__Committing to an object without saving it_ section.
```
